# Logic Engineers Truth
## Barry Jay
### 2024-12-14

Logic is engineering, not science. The same holds for category theory,
and any type system that corresponds to a logic through the
Curry-Howard Isomorphism.

These are bold statements, to be sure. The usual definitions assert
that engineers make useful stuff, while scientists discover things
about nature. This is a pretty good description of the people
involved, but doesn't really apply to theories. For me, engineering is
*synthetic* while science is *analytic*. That is, engineering combines
components to produce useful things. The utility is inferred from the
known (or assumed) properties of the components. By contrast, science
divides compounds into atoms, and atoms into particles, to determine
their nature as precisely as possible.

Now logic is the study of valid arguments, deciding whether a
conclusion follows from some premises. The premises are the
components, which are combined to form the conclusion. Logic doesn't
care if the conclusion is useful or not, but it is synthetic, not
analytic, which is the key point. It follows that any type system that
corresponds to a logic is also engineering, not science.  This is true
of most type systems, especially when they are intended to provide
interfaces for programs as components. 


The argument is even clearer for category theory, which can be thought
of as the algebra of composition. Dont' ask about the nature of the
arrows, as they are the premises. The remarkable thing about category
theory is the claim that one form of combination, namely composition,
is enough for all purposes.


Actually, the argument extends to combinatory logic, too. One starts
with a small collection of primitives, say $S,K$ and $I$, and combine
them in exactly one way (application) to produce useful
programs. Although we know a lot about these primitives, we don't know
everything. For example, $I$ may be an atom (an operator) or a
compound (e.g. $SKK$) but this analytic question doesn't matter for
engineering purposes.

To the extent that $\lambda$-calculus is equivalent to combinatory
logic, it too is an engineering discipline. More precisly, although we
can see all the internal structure of a
$\lambda$-abstraction, it cannot be revealed within the calculus,
except through application.

It follows that logic, category theory, combinatory logic and
$\lambda$-calculus may be good foundations for *computer engineering*,
they cannot provide a foundation for *computer science*.  To take but
one example, complexity theory estimates the run-time of a program as
a function of the size of its inputs, as determined by analysis.

We can expand our vocabulary by aligning synthesis with extensionality
and analysis with intensionality. Logic, category theory, combinatory
logic and $\lambda$-calculus are all extensional, in that they focus
on combination, not factorisation. By contrast, [pattern calculus](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-540-89185-7),
[SF-calculus](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-symbolic-logic/listing?q=a+combinatory+account+of+internal+structure&productId=56ED3BA46977662562A26BC04DD604FD&context=%2Fjournals%2Fjournal-of-symbolic-logic&type=journal&fts=yes) and [tree calculus](https://github.com/barry-jay-personal/tree-calculus) are also intensional. Pattern calculus
can analyse data but not functions. $SF$-calculus can analyse
arbitrary programs, but the choice of $S$ and $F$ is artificial. Tree
calculus is more natural, and is complete for program analysis in the
way that the extensional theories are complete for numerical analysis.

All of the theories above are important: after all, engineering is
important.  All of them were developed to address specific
questions. Predicate logic showed that existence is a property of
predicates, not of things (the truth of "There is no golden mountain"
does not require a witness). $\lambda$-calculus describes functions as
finite rules, without requiring any infinite sets of input-output
pairs). Category theory shows how much of mathematics can be engineered
without analysis of fundamentals.

That said, we are now in a position to work on the science, too. We
have seen that tree calculus provides a scientific foundation for
programming. For example, the size of a program is itself a
program. How far can this analysis extend to the hardware of
computing? Could it also provide a foundation for mathematics? Instead
of sets, or the objects and arrows of a category, why not adopt binary
natural trees as the underlying structure of mathematics? These trees
are both data and functions; they are finite; and support
computation. What more is required? How far can we get? Time will
tell.
